RFC 2: Spectral Properties
==========================

| Authors:
| Andreas Janz andreas.janz@geo.hu-berlin.de
| Benjamin Jakimow, benjamin.jakimow@geo.hu-berlin.de

| Started: 2021-12-23
| Last modified: 2025-10-23

Status: Proposed

Summary
-------

Based on the `ENVI header format <https://www.nv5geospatialsoftware.com/docs/enviheaderfiles.html#HeaderFields>`_ and
the `STAC Electro-Optical Extension Specification <https://github.com/stac-extensions/eo>`_, it is proposed to
implement functions or methods for reading and writing band-specific spectral properties from/to
QGIS Raster Layers using the custom properties. Addressed spectral properties are:

.. csv-table::
    :header: "Band Property", "Examples", "ENVI Header Field", "STAC EO"

    "(center) wavelength", "0.38638 (float)", "wavelength", "eo:center_wavelength *(in micrometers)*"
    "wavelength unit", "micrometers, μm (string)", "wavelength units", "N/A"
    "full with at half maximum (fwhm)", 	0.00545 (float), "fwhm", "eo:full_width_half_max *(in micrometers)*"
    "bad band multiplier", 1 or 0 (int), "bbl", N/A

QGIS doesn't provides a concept for spectral property management, and GDAL just recently implemented (version 3.10)
`support for wavelengths and fwhm <https://gdal.org/en/stable/user/raster_data_model.html#imagery-domain-remote-sensing>`_.
The here proposed approach integrates spectral property handling into *QGIS custom properties*.
This allows to set/update spectral properties for each band of a *QgsRasterLayer* and to set spectral information
for layers, whose data sources are immutable / read-only.

Exemplary API support is implemented in the
`enmapboxprocessing.rasterreader.RasterReader <https://github.com/EnMAP-Box/enmap-box/blob/main/enmapboxprocessing/rasterreader.py>`_ and
`qps.qgsrasterlayerproperties.QgsRasterLayerSpectralProperties <https://github.com/EnMAP-Box/qgispluginsupport/blob/master/qps/qgsrasterlayerproperties.py>`_ classes

Motivation
----------

The ENVI format is very common in the hyperspectral community. It describes spectral properties
of raster images in the fields of `ENVI header files <https://www.nv5geospatialsoftware.com/docs/enviheaderfiles.html#HeaderFields>`_:

.. code-block:: text

    ENVI
    ...
    wavelength units = Micrometers
    wavelength = {0.46, 0.465, 0.47, ..., 2.393, 2.401, 2.409}
    fwhm = {0.0058, 0.0058, 0.0058, ..., 0.0091, 0.0091, 0.0091}
    bbl = {1, 1, 1, ..., 1, 1, 1}

In GDAL, these values can be read from the *ENVI* metadata domain:

.. code-block:: python

    ds: gdal.Dataset = gdal.Open(path_envifile)

    wl: str = ds.GetMetadataItem('wavelength', 'ENVI')
    # note the required underscore in wavelength_units
    wlu: str = ds.GetMetadataItem('wavelength_units', 'ENVI')
    fwhm: str = ds.GetMetadataItem('fwhm', 'ENVI')

All values are returned as strings, e.g. **wavelength** as **'{0.46, 0.465, 0.47, ..., 2.393, 2.401, 2.409}'**.

Since version 3.10, GDAL supports reading and writing of **wavelength** and **fwhm** at band level.

.. code-block:: python

    ds: gdal.Dataset = gdal.Open(path_envifile)
    band: gdal.Band = ds.GetRasterBand(1)
    wl = float(band.GetMetadataItem('CENTRAL_WAVELENGTH_UM', 'IMAGERY')))
    fwhm: float(band.GetMetadataItem('FWHM_UM', 'IMAGERY')))

If implemented by the GDAL driver, the returned strings can be converted directly
into float values. As now, this is supported by the GTiff, SENTINEL2, ENVI and VRT driver.

*Problems*

1. Spectral information can be found in different locations of the GDAL Metadata system: as band metadata, as dataset metadata, in different metadata domains.

2. Since GDAL 3.10, a standardized way exists to access wavelength and fwhm, but not the bad band multiplier.

3. Depending on data providers, spectral information may still be defined in different places of the GDAL metadata model.

4. GDAL is flexible to write spectral information into different locations. If not handled by the driver,
   GDAL will write it into a separated **aux.xml** file::

    .. code-block:: text

        <Metadata domain="ENVI">
          ...
          <MDI key="fwhm">{ 0.005800, 0.005800, 0.005800, ..., , 0.009100, 0.009100, 0.009100}</MDI>
          <MDI key="wavelength">{ 0.46, 0.465, 0.47, ..., 2.393, 2.401, 2.409}</MDI>
          <MDI key="bbl">{ 1, 1, 1, ..., 1, 1, 1}</MDI>
          <MDI key="wavelength_units">Micrometers</MDI>
        </Metadata>

5. Correcting or supplementing missing spectral information requires write permissions, which may not be available.
   Furthermore, while being opened in QGIS as QgsRasterLayer, modifications of the datasource's GDAL metadata may
   get overridden by QGIS. This can lead to the problem that the EnMAP-Box cannot modify metadata from rasters
   when they are opened in QGIS / EnMAP Box.


Approach
--------

Band-wise spectral properties like **wavelength**, **wavelength units**, full width at half maximum (**fwhm**),
and bad band multiplier (**bbl**) values, are fetched with the following priorisation:

1. Look into the QgsRasterLayer custom properties and search for keys with **enmapbox** prefix.
This is mainly relevant for GUI applications, where we need to modify
spectral properties using **QgsRasterLayer** objects, without being able to modify the underlying raster source:

.. code-block:: python
    layer = QgsRasterLayer(path)
    wavelengthUnits = layer.customProperty('enmapbox/wavelength_units')
    wavelength = layer.customProperty('enmapbox/wavelength')
    fwhm = layer.customProperty('enmapbox/fwhm')
    bbl = layer.customProperty('enmapbox/bbl')


2. Look at GDAL band metadata. Search within the standard and ENVI domain

    .. code-block:: python

        ds = gdal.Dataset(path)
        band = ds.GetRasterBand(42)

        # test IMAGERY domain
        fwhm = band.GetMetadataItem('FWHM_UM', 'IMAGERY)
        wl =   band.GetMetadataItem('CENTRAL_WAVELENGTH_UM')

        # bad band multiplier
        bbl = band.GetMetadataItem('bbl')

        # test other domains
        if wl is None:
            for domain in ['', 'ENVI']:
                wlu = band.GetMetadataItem('wavelength_units', domain)
                fwhm = band.GetMetadataItem('fwhm', domain)
                wl = band.GetMetadataItem('wavelength', domain)


3. Look at GDAL dataset metadata. Search within the standard and ENVI domain
    .. code-block:: python

        ds = gdal.Dataset(path)

        for domain in ['', 'ENVI']:
            # bad band multiplier
            bbl = band.GetMetadataItem('bbl')
            wlu = band.GetMetadataItem('wavelength_units', domain)
            wl = band.GetMetadataItem('wavelength', domain)
            fwhm = band.GetMetadataItem('fwhm', domain)



Note that the *parseEnviString* function helps to parse returned ENVI list string like '{1, 2, 3}' into Python lists like [1, 2, 3].

Guide line 1:
    If you need to set band-wise spectral properties in a processing algorithm:
    set it to the **gdal.Band** 'IMAGERY' or default ('') domain.
    This way, i) the information is accessible with the GDAL API,
    and ii) consecutive band subsetting via gdal.Translate and gdal.BuildVrt can easily copy the band domains to the destination dataset.

Guide line 2:
    If you need to set/update metadata for a QgsRasterLayer in an EnMAP-Box GUI application: set it to layer's custom properties
    This is most flexible and secure. The spectral properties are i) available from the layer instance, ii) can be
    inspected in the layer property dialog, ii) are stored in the QGIS project, and iii) can be saved to QML layer style files

Guide line 3:
    Do not update the GDAL Metadata model (\*.aux.xml files),
    while the corresponding source is opened as a **QgsRasterLayer** in QGIS.
    QGIS will potentially overwrite any changes, when closing the layer.

Implementation
--------------

Example implementations are given by the **QgsRasterLayerSpectralProperties** and **RasterReader** classes:

.. code-block:: python

    from enmapbox.qgispluginsupport.qps.qgsrasterlayerproperties import QgsRasterLayerSpectralProperties
    from enmapboxprocessing.rasterreader import RasterReader

    properties = QgsRasterLayerSpectralProperties(layer)
    wavelengths: List[float] = properties.wavelength()
    wavelength_subset = properties.bandValues([1,2,3], 'wavelength')

    reader = RasterReader(layer)
    wavelength = reader.wavelength(42)
    fwhm = reader.fwhm(42)
    badBandMultiplier = reader.badBandMultiplier(42)

The destination wavelength units (default is nanometers) can also be stated::

    wavelengthInNanometers = reader.wavelength(42, 'nanometers')
    wavelengthInMicrometers = reader.wavelength(42, 'micrometers')
    wavelengthInMillimeters = reader.wavelength(42, 'millimeters')
    wavelengthInMeter = reader.wavelength(42, 'meters')

To find the band closest to 850 nanometers use::

    bandNo = reader.findWavelength(850)
    bandNo = reader.findWavelength(0.850, 'micrometers')
